This is what my last week looked like. What I did, who I was with, the main sensations I had for every waking hour… If the feeling came as I thought of my dad who recently passed away, or if I could have just definitely avoided the worries and anxieties. And if you think I'm a little obsessive, you're probably right. But clearly, from this visualization, you can learn much more about me than from this other one, which are images you're probably more familiar with and which you possibly even have on your phone right now. Bar charts for the steps you walked, pie charts for the quality of your sleep, the path of your morning runs.

In my day job, I work with data. I run a data visualization design company, and we design and develop ways to make information accessible through visual representations. What my job has taught me over the years is that to really understand data and their true potential, sometimes we actually have to forget about them and see through them instead. Because data are always just a tool we use to represent reality. They're always used as a placeholder for something else, but they are never the real thing.

But let me step back for a moment to when I first understood this personally. In 1994, I was 13 years old. I was a teenager in Italy. I was too young to be interested in politics, but I knew that a businessman, Silvio Berlusconi, was running for president for the moderate right. We lived in a very liberal town, and my father was a politician for the Democratic Party. And I remember that no one thought that Berlusconi could get elected, that was totally not an option. But it happened. And I remember the feeling very vividly. It was a complete surprise, as my dad promised that in my town he knew nobody who voted for him.

This was the first time when the data I had gave me a completely distorted image of reality. My data sample was actually pretty limited and skewed, so probably it was because of that, I thought, I lived in a bubble, and I didn't have enough chances to see outside of it.

Now, fast-forward to November 8, 2016 in the United States. The internet polls, statistical models, all the pundits agreeing on a possible outcome for the presidential election. It looked like we had enough information this time, and many more chances to see outside the closed circle we lived in, but we clearly didn't. The feeling felt very familiar. I had been there before. I think it's fair to say the data failed us this time, and pretty spectacularly. We believed in data, but what happened, even with the most respected newspaper, is that the obsession to reduce everything to two simple percentage numbers to make a powerful headline made us focus on these two digits and them alone. In an effort to simplify the message and draw a beautiful, inevitable red and blue map, we lost the point completely. We somehow forgot that there were stories, stories of human beings behind these numbers.

In a different context, but to a very similar point, a peculiar challenge was presented to my team by this woman. She came to us with a lot of data, but ultimately she wanted to tell one of the most humane stories possible. She's Samantha Cristoforetti. She has been the first Italian woman astronaut, and she contacted us before being launched on a six-month-long expedition to the International Space Station. She told us, "I'm going to space, and I want to do something meaningful with the data of my mission to reach out to people." A mission to the International Space Station comes with terabytes of data about anything you can possibly imagine, the orbits around Earth, the speed and position of the ISS and all of the other thousands of live streams from its sensors. We had all of the hard data we could think of, just like the pundits before the election, but what is the point of all these numbers? People are not interested in data for the sake of it, because numbers are never the point. They're always the means to an end. The story we needed to tell is that there is a human being in a teeny box flying in space above your head, and that you can actually see her with your naked eye on a clear night. So we decided to use data to create a connection between Samantha and all of the people looking at her from below. We designed and developed what we called "Friends in Space," a web application that simply lets you say "hello" to Samantha from where you are, and "hello" to all the people who are online at the same time from all over the world. And all of these "hellos" left visible marks on the map as Samantha was flying by and as she was actually waving back every day at us using Twitter from the ISS.

This made people see the mission's data from a very different perspective. It all suddenly became much more about our human nature and our curiosity, rather than technology. So data powered the experience, but stories of human beings were the drive. The very positive response of its thousands of users taught me a very important lesson, that working with data means designing ways to transform the abstract and the uncountable into something that can be seen, felt and directly reconnected to our lives and to our behaviors, something that is hard to achieve if we let the obsession for the numbers and the technology around them lead us in the process. But we can do even more to connect data to the stories they represent. We can remove technology completely.

A few years ago, I met this other woman, Stefanie Posavec, a London-based designer who shares with me the passion and obsession about data. We didn't know each other, but we decided to run a very radical experiment, starting a communication using only data, no other language, and we opted for using no technology whatsoever to share our data. In fact, our only means of communication would be through the old-fashioned post office. For "Dear Data," every week for one year, we used our personal data to get to know each other, personal data around weekly shared mundane topics, from our feelings to the interactions with our partners, from the compliments we received to the sounds of our surroundings. Personal information that we would then manually hand draw on a postcard-size sheet of paper that we would every week send from London to New York, where I live, and from New York to London, where she lives. The front of the postcard is the data drawing, and the back of the card contains the address of the other person, of course, and the legend for how to interpret our drawing. The very first week into the project, we actually chose a pretty cold and impersonal topic. How many times do we check the time in a week? So here is the front of my card, and you can see that every little symbol represents all of the times that I checked the time, positioned for days and different hours chronologically, nothing really complicated here. But then you see in the legend how I added anecdotal details about these moments. In fact, the different types of symbols indicate why I was checking the time, what was I doing? Was I bored? Was I hungry? Was I late? Did I check it on purpose or just casually glance at the clock? And this is the key part, representing the details of my days and my personality through my data collection. Using data as a lens or a filter to discover and reveal, for example, my never-ending anxiety for being late, even though I'm absolutely always on time.

Stefanie and I spent one year collecting our data manually to force us to focus on the nuances that computers cannot gather, or at least not yet, using data also to explore our minds and the words we use, and not only our activities. Like at week number three, where we tracked the "thank yous" we said and were received, and when I realized that I thank mostly people that I don't know. Apparently I'm a compulsive thanker to waitresses and waiters, but I definitely don't thank enough the people who are close to me.

Over one year, the process of actively noticing and counting these types of actions became a ritual. It actually changed ourselves. We became much more in tune with ourselves, much more aware of our behaviors and our surroundings. Over one year, Stefanie and I connected at a very deep level through our shared data diary, but we could do this only because we put ourselves in these numbers, adding the contexts of our very personal stories to them. It was the only way to make them truly meaningful and representative of ourselves.

I am not asking you to start drawing your personal data, or to find a pen pal across the ocean. But I'm asking you to consider data, all kind of data, as the beginning of the conversation and not the end. Because data alone will never give us a solution. And this is why data failed us so badly, because we failed to include the right amount of context to represent reality, a nuanced, complicated and intricate reality. We kept looking at these two numbers, obsessing with them and pretending that our world could be reduced to a couple digits and a horse race, while the real stories, the ones that really mattered, were somewhere else.

What we missed looking at these stories only through models and algorithms is what I call "data humanism." In the Renaissance humanism, European intellectuals placed the human nature instead of God at the center of their view of the world. I believe something similar needs to happen with the universe of data. Now data are apparently treated like a God, keeper of infallible truth for our present and our future.

The experiences that I shared with you today taught me that to make data faithfully representative of our human nature and to make sure they will not mislead us anymore, we need to start designing ways to include empathy, imperfection and human qualities in how we collect, process, analyze and display them. I do see a place where, ultimately, instead of using data only to become more efficient, we will all use data to become more humane. Thank you.

I don’t think there is one particular similarity that strikes me, I am fascinated by the general parallel of the two disciplines. One thing that we have to keep in mind is that architects don’t actually build buildings, they design representations of buildings, images of buildings following a language of symbols that have to convey information about how to manufacture them. In order to convey the right kind of information on an architectural drawing, you have to become very precise at shaping layers, visual hierarchies, and making sure that everything is abstracted in the right way. In fact, architects also do a virtual representation of the building for the general public: for their potential inhabitants to understand how it will look and how it will be used. So, both in information design and in architecture everything runs around the art of representing reality through diagrams, in a bi-dimensional space, and for different audiences; it is this overall analogy that intrigues me the most.

During my M.Arch studies, I was very interested in aspects concerning the representation of information, and I tried to push all my architecture and urban projects towards working with information and mapping systems; even my M.Arch thesis (in 2006) was definitely an urban mapping project. For the next 4 years, I worked with different interaction design firms in Italy focusing my contributions on visual documentation and representation, mapping and information architecture. Also, I’ve been playing the piano for a long time, and I started to be attracted to the contemporary music notation movement in my early twenties. It came naturally for me to progressively focus more and more on data, and of the visual representation of data. When I realized the true potential of working visually with structured data to convey information about phenomena or contexts, I simply fell in love with this world and the realm of possibility it opens. Finally, in 2011 I both co-founded my own information design company, Accurat, and started a PhD in communication design within DensityDesign Lab at Milan Politecnico.

There is definitely still plenty of room for innovation, I would actually say the opposite: it is an uncommonly exciting time to be a data visualization designer now. Projects and opportunities get more challenging, and the field of data visualization is growing and becoming more popular. The market and our role as data visualization designers is changing for sure — data visualization has gone mainstream: now almost everybody can pull their data into an easy-to-use-tool and create standard and simple charts, but this is exactly why I believe there will be more and more need for highly custom designs. We still have to find new languages, new ways of entertaining people; we have to make visuals that can become magnetic to people who are not familiar with data practices. We have amazing challenges to address: how can we keep on exploring, guessing, imagining, hunching, trying combinations and trying to inspire feelings, being faithful to scientific accuracy while allowing space for exceptions to flourish, with the aim of bringing a range of new possibilities to the table? I guess those questions are and will be valid for a while!

We’ve been working side-by-side with the newsroom of Corriere della Sera for more than 2 years, designing a series of more than 30 exploratory data visualizations. The experience was great, because we’ve always seen is at our sandbox to experiment, to test, to formulate our processes and methods upon the different feedback we received, and to learn. We always aimed here at composing rich visual narratives: maintaining the informative richness of the data analysis we performed but making this richness more accessible and understandable through a visualization; it has been a sort of stress test, how much complexity can a reader absorb? This taught us a lot about how to go beyond the curious (but shallow) world of the web infographics we are used to, and helped us create our method for what we call “multilayered storytelling.”. One of the things that we enjoyed about producing those dense and non-conventional data visualizations is that they produce a type of behavior that promotes “slowness” in this era of short attention spans. If we can create visuals that are demanding the “right” slowness and the right amount of engagement, people might slow down to meet it!

To sum-up the whole journalistic experience I’d like to tell you what we learned from it; we learned to embrace complexity. Complexity is a distinctive and inherent feature of our world; it should be embraced and not feared in an effort to simplify things that are naturally rich and multifaceted. A set on Flickr with the works of Accurat for La Lettura, the cultural supplement on the sunday edition of Corriere Della Sera. We learned to pursue beauty because beauty is not a frill. We know how to capture and motivate people to always dig deeper and take more time to explore the folds of visual data analysis. We learned to never bend design problems to what tools can offer out of the box: every dataset is different, and every context brings infinite variables that can hardly be reduced to cookie-cutter processes and solutions. We also learned that numbers don’t mean anything by themselves, they are always a placeholder for something else: people, places, ideas, values.

Yes, at Accurat we started very focused on experimenting visually, building “case studies” of highly customized visual models to represent data in different contexts and through different variables, exploring and working a lot with journalists. In the business sector, we were working mostly with the communication and marketing departments of companies. We built our portfolio around highly customized and dense visual narratives with data, as in our work for La Lettura, and we worked primarily on pieces whose goal was to tell a specific story to a wide and generic audience. More and more now we’re instead in collaborating with clients from very different industries, with diverse business functions: our work is used in finance, human resources, I.T., customer relations, product development… We feel it is definitely a goal for us to keep addressing more and more strategic needs and scaling our business to have more impact within organizations, but we are also working hard to try to keep a uniqueness and this sort of signature that we had when we were a smaller group of individuals.

Starting a new office on a new continent has indeed been a stimulating challenge. In the U.S. the market for data-visualization is indeed bigger than the Italian one, and there is of course much more competition. Interestingly enough, what helped us entering this market the most has been the community and the network of data-visualization friends and practitioners. In a sense, the competition here is quite positive: we are all working to expand the field and the whole business of data-visualization, and it comes pretty natural to “recommend” other respected professionals or companies when one can’t take on a project for whatever reason.

Dear Data is indeed a very very fulfilling (and demanding) project, and I am incredibly happy about this collaboration with Stefanie. Stefanie and I only met twice in person before starting Dear Data last September; we knew each other’s work of course, and we were aware of the many similarities we had as designers. We both use a hand-crafted and illustrative approach to the data visualizations we create, and we both don’t code. Last year at Eyeo, we had few (i.e. many) drinks together and we started to get to know each other a little better than the year before (which was the first time we met in person), and by the end of the festival we decided we absolutely had to collaborate, and I felt excited about it. For the next 2 months a copious number of emails flooded in, and our collaboration started to take shape: analog outputs, daily or weekly datasets, daily or weekly data-drawings, parallel type of data, finding human and personal twists on the data, and so on. As our conversations evolved we start conceiving our collaborative effort as an unconventional way of getting to know each other through our daily data and through our drawings. Even though we knew from the beginning we didn’t want it to be a quantified-self project: we’ve always pictured it more like a ‘personal documentary,’ which is a subtle, but important, distinction. The idea of becoming ‘data pen pals’ and sending postcards to each other across the sea seemed incredibly compelling, and we decided to accept the risk that some of our postcards might get lost or damaged during their travel. I guess the biggest challenge we’re facing is making the proper time for this project. We are also putting together a book proposal and we are holding conversations with different galleries for a possible exhibition, and it is indeed getting more demanding time-wise. Though, and I think I can speak also for Stefanie here, we are incredibly fulfilled by Dear Data, and I would encourage everybody to take on a side project that helps you reflect on your profession and on yourself — possibly with a brilliant and awesome collaborator.

Italy, especially lately, can count a lot of talented information and data visualization designers who are well known internationally, and I couldn’t be happier about it! The greater part of those professionals have studied at Politecnico di Milano and specifically took courses with DensityDesign, so we have to thank Paolo for the most part. What I find particularly interesting is that we are receiving a high number of resumes from traditional graphic designers or interaction designers who are more and more specializing in information design through side projects, or by taking online courses. I believe this means the data-visualization scene and design market is rapidly growing in Italy as well!

I am an Italian information designer living in New York. I have always been a data collector in my life, I remember how, as a child, I loved to collect and organize all kind of items into transparent folders that I would then tag with maniacal care. Colored pieces of papers, little stones, pieces of textiles from my grandmother’s tailor-shop, buttons, sales receipts and many more formed my collections, and I remembers the pleasure of categorizing my treasures according to their colors, sizes and dimensions and drawing tiny labels to specify how to read them. But It wasn’t until later in my life that I discovered the word “data” and its marvelous extensions. It wasn't until lately, in fact, that I started working with data visualization. It came natural to me to progressively focus more on the quantitative side within the information design field, and when I got to understand the true potential of working visually with structured data to convey information about phenomena or contexts, I immediately felt in love with this world and the realm of possibility it opens. I see data visualization as the combination of my ‘artistic’ (or, better said, emotional) side and my rational and scientific one; I have a background in architecture and my mind needs to structure and organize information, but my eyes and my spirit need to see and invent unexpected visuals every time. I enjoy designing visual artifacts that have a logical and structural sense, I don’t take pleasure in producing graphic designs per se, I do instead take pleasure in shaping visual ways to represent quantitative and rigorous parameters.

What drives me in what I do is the overlapping space between analysis and intuition, between logic and beauty, between numbers and images. My work in information visualization frequently crosses the divide between digital and print, exploring visual models and metaphors to represent rich data-driven stories. Both in my day job and in my personal research as a data visualization designer and artist, I focus my practice on experimenting on new visual ways and new visual languages to represent data to make it more “humane” more “contextual” and engaging, and definitely less scary and cold. I draw and sketch a lot with data, this is really my entry point to understanding what is in the number and what are the most interesting and “tailored” / appropriate visual representation of it according to their very nature and kind, which is different every time. I sketch with data even when - as the 99% of the times happen - the final output is digital. In my work with data, I always start from sketching, and I approach data in a very handcrafted way. Sketching with data, and removing technology from the equation before bringing it back, introduces novel ways of thinking, and ultimately leads to designs that are uniquely customized for the specific type of data problems we are working with. I draw to freely explore possibilities. I draw to visually understand what I am thinking, I draw to evaluate my ideas and intuitions by seeing them coming to life on paper, I draw to help my mind thinking without limitations, without boundaries. I see data in my drawings. With my work I question a merely technological approach to data. Data is more than numbers, it always represents real life, it can be a snapshot of the world in the same way that a picture catches small moments in time. With my work, I challenge the impersonality that data might communicate, designing visual narratives that connect numbers to what they stand for: knowledge, behaviors, people.

After graduating in Architecture, I have been involved in multidisciplinary projects in the information, technology and interaction design fields; investigating the role that data can have to describe architectural practices as a visual designer for experimental architecture firm LEAA, and experimenting on data-driven interactive visual storytelling in physical spaces within my collaboration with N!03 studio. I then joined Interaction Design Lab where I led a design team working on urban mapping projects. In 2011 I started a PhD in Design Milan Politecnico, at Density Design Lab where I researched on the potential of text mining methods applied to geo-localized User Generated content to extract and analyze pattern of usage of urban environments. Part of my PhD Thesis has been published as a text book from Springer. I obtained the title of PhD cum Meritum in 2014, after a 6 months period as a visiting researcher at the Parsons Institute for Information Mapping in New York. In 2011, I also co-founded Accurat, an information design agency based in Milan and New York; Accurat analyzes data and contexts and designs analytical tools and visual narratives that provide awareness, comprehension and engagement. At Accurat, we’ve been designing a series of exploratory data-visualizations within our 2 years long collaboration with La Lettura, Corriere della Sera. In this collaboration we always aimed at opening new perspectives in the newspaper-editorial field, and higher aimed at educating readers’ eyes to get familiar with new visual ways to convey the richness of the data stories we are telling rather than simplifying them.

Our work for La Lettura won major international awards such as the Gold Medal for Data Visualization at the Information is Beautiful Awards, The Gold Medal for Data Journalism at the Strata Conference, a Bronze Lion at the Cannes Festival among all. It has been featured and mentioned on several outlets such as The New York Times, Forbes, Fast Company, Brain Pickings, among all. In the last 5 years at Accurat, we collaborated successfully with banks and financial institutions, large and small tech ventures, major publishers and media companies, international public bodies and businesses across different industries. We have been designing and developing interactive experiences to bring people closer to understanding the real value of information through visual data-narratives of different kinds. One of the most challenging work of the past year was our collaboration with Astronaut Samantha Cristoforetti. We conceived and deployed what we called Friends in Space, a 6 months long open window to let people interact with her while she was on the I.S.S. part of the Futura 42 Mission: a data driven experience based that focused on the importance of reconnecting numbers to what they stand for: people, behaviors, our lives.

In 2014 I started a year long analog project called Dear Data: a life changing collaboration with London based data illustrator Stefanie Posavec. Every week and for a year we’ve been manually collecting our personal data around a shared topic, used this data to make a drawing on a postcard-sized sheet of paper, and then dropped the postcard on the mailbox to be delivered to the other person. We’ve been getting to know each other through our data and with our drawings, with the goal of showing that data is not scary and not necessarily big but ever present in our daily life, and you don’t need to be a statistician or a programmer to approach it. The project has turned into a book published by Penguin, Particular Books in the UK, and by Princeton Architectural Press in the US. A selection of our postcards has been displayed at the StoreFront for Art and Architecture in New York, the Science Museum in London, the Somerset House in London, the Milan Design week. Dear Data won the Gold Medal for Data visualization and the Most Beautiful Project Award at the Information is Beautiful 2015. We had the pleasure to give the opening Keynote Speech at the Eyeo Festival, and the Closing Keynote at the Visualized Conference in 2015. Dear Data has been nominated for the DesignMuseum Beazley Designs of the Year 2016, and is among the finalists for the Innovation By Design Awards 2016. A full list of our interviews and press is available on the projects' pages.

Currently, I am the Design Director at Accurat and I direct the New York office. In  my PopTech talk, I spoke about how we always associate data with more efficiency, more automation, while I argue we can absolutely use data to become more human, to connect with ourselves and others at a deeper level, if we design the right ways to do it. My current personal research focuses in various way on how we can investigate and reveal aspect of our human life and essence through the world of data. In a 10 page essay that is published on Print-Mag in the Fall 2016 Issue, I explored and defined what I call DATA HUMANISM, that I hope will be the next and new way to approach data in our lives.

I studied architecture at the university, but I have never built or designed any houses. During my M.Arch studies I've always been more interested in aspects concerning the representation of information, and I tried to push all my architectural and urban projects towards working with information and mapping systems; even my M.Arch thesis (in 2006) was an urban mapping project. For the following 4 years I've been collaborating with different interaction design firms in Italy, focusing my contributions on visual documentation and representation, mapping, and information architecture.

It wasn't until lately that I started working specifically with data visualization. It came natural to me to progressively focus more on the quantitative side within the information design field, and when I got to understand the true potential of working visually with structured data to convey information about phenomena or contexts, I simply felt in love with this world and the realm of possibility it opens. Then, in 2011 I both co-founded my on information design company (Accurat), and started a PhD in communication design at DensityDesign Lab at Milan Politecnico.

As for the job that I am doing today: at Accurat we rely on building multidisciplinary teams to work on our projects. Our team is made of designers, developers, data analysts, interaction designers, and also interestingly one of my partners, Simone, is a sociologist. I am coordinating the design teams for the representation part.

I believe my background in architecture has influenced my production considerably. The very fact that I spent almost 5 years of my life designing, "composing" and manually drawing architectural and urban plans shaped my mind and my visual aesthetics a lot. Moreover, I have played the piano for a long time, and I've been always very fascinated by the "repetitive" aesthetic of musical scores and intrigued by the contemporary music notation style; I believe this fascination of mine is reflected in my work as well.

Lastly, as a human being, I have a very visual mind, and I need to draw and sketch to understand my surroundings. In fact, I’m not usually able to perfectly get and define what I’m thinking, or what pops up in my mind about a design problem, I usually say that I cannot think about a project without a pen and some paper. I know drawing is my way to understand I had an idea in the first place. Besides, I take an incredible pleasure in drawing, in tracing lines on paper and seeing abstract shapes come alive and I’ve came to realize this practice gives shape to my inner thoughts, and influenced my visual design production consistently over years.

The short answer is: it is something you feel, it is completed when it feels “just right”. The long answer considers of course many other aspects. I believe it’s a matter of setting the right priorities every time. We all wish we could have unlimited time to refine our projects, but we all need to deal with deadlines. The questions I usually ask myself when a deadline is hanging over my head are very practical: does it miss anything absolutely necessary for its comprehension? Is it polished and refined enough that the hierarchies of information stand out?

I would say the pursue for beauty. I've come to believe that pure beautiful visual works are somehow relevant in everyday life, because they can become a trigger to get people curious to explore the contents these visuals convey. I like the idea of making people say "oh that's beautiful! I want to know what this is about!".

And also, not being a data scientist or a statistician my self, I see the focus of my persona work with Accurat on designing pleasant aesthetics that tell data-stories; I like, thus, to describe my approach and our work as an attempt to "compose" aesthetically beautiful and multilayered images with data. Of course, the accuracy of information representation principles should be followed, and we try to do it while always pushing a little bit farther the boundaries of what we can produce, visually speaking.

I think that probably (or, at least, lots of people pointed that out to us) being Italians plays its role on this idea of "making things not only functional but beautiful". I also believe that well balanced and harmonious aesthetics can add a human touch to the world of data, and thus potentially interest and attract a wider audience.

Building an approach, a recognized method and a workflow is especially useful when you don’t work on your own but with a team of people. At Accurat, for example, we now are 20 people, and we spent a good bit to time during the last couple of years in establishing our workflow, and our principles for designing and developing our projects. A method that can be taught serves as the foundation for the collaborations among designers, and designers and developers; and it also helps new comers to embrace our design philosophy and our style.

When I work on my personal projects, or on projects on my own at Accurat, I definitely leave my self a lot more freedom. As I already mentioned, my approach consists of a lot of sketching. I draw to freely explore possibilities, I draw to visually understand what I am thinking. I draw to evaluate my ideas and intuitions by seeing them coming to life on paper, I draw to help my mind thinking without limitations, without boundaries.

I would say, first of all, every designer should learn how to “see”, to understand and be aware of what are the aesthetic qualities that attract us in all kind of visuals we like. Learning to see means observing which details make the difference in the visual aesthetics even by starting with replicating those images (and not necessarily data visualizations) that your eyes are fascinated from. Then, play a lot with visual hierarchies, try to cut and remove all the visual clutter, make only important things stand out and leave the rest for the background. Choose a color palette that feels beautiful (and appropriate) beforehand rather than picking random colors one after the other while designing. Also, consider white space as a design space, and don’t necessarily try to fill the whole piece with details and elements: white space and general “air” of the compositions are key elements to its perceived elegance.

Personally I think that (again!) drawing by hand and playing an instrument helps my mind to stay prolific. But more generally speaking, I believe that engaging in (i.e. making time for) personal projects is necessary. With Dear Data for example, (a year long collaborative laborious analog data drawing effort) I realized the importance of experimenting on making things when no client is judging you and when there’s none looking over your shoulder. You can try things, you can take risks and explore hunches, you ultimately get to do the kind do work that you want to.

We are all busy (I personally don't like the word busy), but I would encourage anyone to make a little of spare time for projects that are outside our day job. We all have a passion for what we do, we're lucky we are in a very interesting industry, but we easily end up only making the work that helps to pay the rent, procrastinating personal ideas and projects to nobody-knows-when. I guess the most of us has a resolution list of things we want to do for ourselves but we just have a hard time making the time for that. I believe it’s just a matter of starting, and starting can be as simple as “I will go to a cafe and sit with my notebooks for just an hour every Tuesday after work”. With Dear Data we’ve created a habit for our non-demand work, it helped us staying prolific, producing more consistently and it opened up unexpected new and exciting directions.

Data Humanism, the Revolution will be Visualized.

We’ve reached Peak Infographics. Are you ready for what comes next?

Data is now recognized as one of the founding pillars of our economy, and the notion that the world grows exponentially richer in data every day is already yesterday’s news. Big Data doesn’t belong to a distant dystopian future; it’s a commodity and an intrinsic and iconic feature of our present — like dollars, concrete, automobiles and Helvetica. The ways we relate to data are evolving more rapidly than we realize, and our minds and bodies are naturally adapting to this new hybrid reality built of both physical and informational structures. And visual design — with its power to instantly reach out to places in our subconscious without the mediation of language, and with its inherent ability to convey large amounts of structured and unstructured information across cultures — is going to be even more central to this silent but inevitable revolution.

Data visualization pioneers such as William Playfair, John Snow, Florence Nightingale and Charles Joseph Minard were the first to leverage and codify this potential in the 18th and 19th centuries, and modern advocates such as Edward Tufte, Ben Shneiderman, Jeffrey Heer and Alberto Cairo are among those responsible for the renaissance of the field over the last 20 years, supporting the transition of these principles to the world of Big Data. Thanks to this renewed interest, a first wave of data visualization took over the web and reached a broader audience outside the academic environments where it lived until then. But sadly, this wave was ridden by many in a superficial way, as a linguistic shortcut to compensate for the natural vertigo caused by the immeasurable nature of Big Data. “Cool” infographics promised us the key to master this untamable complexity and, when they inevitably failed to deliver on this overly optimistic expectation, we were left with gigabytes of unreadable 3D pie charts and cheap translucent user interfaces full of widgets that even Tony Stark or Minority Report’s detective John Anderton would have a hard time making sense of.

In fact, visual design is often applied to data simply as a cosmetic retouch of important and complicated issues in an attempt to make them look simpler than they are. What made cheap marketing infographics so popular is probably their biggest contradiction: the false claim that a couple of pictograms and a few big numbers have the innate power to “simplify complexity.” The phenomena that rule our world are by definition complex, multifaceted and mostly difficult to grasp, so why would anyone want to dumb them down to make crucial decisions or deliver important messages? But not all is bad in this sudden craze for data visualization. Not only are we now realizing that there is still a substantial distance between the real potential that lies hidden in vast pools of data and the superficial imagery we often use to represent them, but most importantly, we realize that the first wave was successful in making others more familiar with new terms and visual languages.

Now that we are past what we can call peak infographics, we are left with a general audience that understands some of the tools needed to welcome a second wave of more meaningful and thoughtful visualization. We are ready to question the impersonality of a merely technical approach to data, and to begin designing ways to connect numbers to what they really stand for: knowledge, behaviors, people. Data represents real life. It is a snapshot of the world in the same way that a picture catches a small moment in time. Numbers are always placeholders for something else, a way to capture a point of view — but sometimes this can get lost. Failing to represent these limitations and nuances and blindly putting numbers in a chart is like reviewing a movie by analyzing the chemical properties of the cellulose on which the images were recorded. In its second wave, data visualization will inevitably be all about personalization. The more ubiquitous data becomes, the more we need to experiment with how to make it unique, contextual, intimate. The way we visualize it is crucial because it is the key to translating numbers into concepts we can relate to. So how do we move forward?

Complexity is an inherent feature of our existence — the world is rich in information that can be combined in endless ways. Creating new points of view or uncovering something new typically cannot happen at a mere glance; this process of revelation often needs and requires an in-depth investigation of the context. Whenever the main purpose of data visualization is to open people’s eyes to fresh knowledge, it is impractical to avoid a certain level of visual complexity. In a collaboration that lasted more than two years with the newsroom of Italy’s largest newspaper, Corriere Della Sera, my design company, Accurat, had the opportunity to work on a series of experimental data visualizations for their Sunday cultural supplement. Our role was to conceive visual narratives, based on data, that achieved the same thoughtfulness and depth of the other essays published in the supplement — pushing the boundaries of what visualization can do with high-density data rife with multiple attributes.

Each week, we chose an interesting topic to explore, and we searched for multiple data sources, both quantitative and qualitative, that we then combined into a single elaborate visual narrative. The goal was to move away from a simple measurement of quantity; we transformed raw information into interconnected knowledge, presenting unexpected parallels and secondary tales to supplement the main story. Since clarity does not need to come all at once, we layered multiple visual narratives over a main construct that served as the jumping-in point for readers to begin and follow their interest. We call this process nonlinear storytelling; people can get happily lost exploring individual elements, minor tales and larger trends within the greater visualization, while being naturally invited to engage with the visual on deeper levels. We can write rich and dense stories with data. We can educate the reader’s eye to become familiar with visual languages that convey the true depth of complex stories. Dense and unconventional data visualizations promote slowness — a particularly poignant goal to set in our era of ever-shortening attention spans. If we can create visuals that encourage careful reading and personal engagement, people will find more and more real value in data and in what it represents.

One size does not fit all. Business intelligence tools and dataviz tools for marketers have led many to believe that the ideal way to make sense of information is to load data into a tool, pick from among a list of suggested out-of-the-box charts, and get the job done in a couple of clicks. This common approach is actually nothing more than blindly throwing technology at the problem, sometimes without spending enough time framing the question that triggered the exploration in the first place. This often leads to results that are not only practically useless, but also deeply wrong, because prepackaged solutions are rarely able to frame problems that are difficult to define, let alone solve. As Steven Heller writes in the introduction to his book The Infographic Designers’ Sketchbooks, “Making enticingly accurate infographics requires more than a computer drafting program or cut-and-paste template, the art of information display is every bit as artful as any other type of design or illustration, with the notable exception that it must tell a factual or linear story.”. Thoughtful design comes to the rescue again. What I always do when I start a new data project is to move away from the screen and start drawing. I draw with data in my mind, but with no data in my pen: I sketch with data to understand what is contained in the numbers and in their structure, and how to define and organize those quantities in a visual way to create opportunities to gain insight. Sketching with data — so, in a way, removing technology from the equation before bringing it back to finalize the design with digital tools — introduces novel ways of thinking, and leads to designs that are uniquely customized for the specific type of data problems we are working with. I draw to freely explore possibilities. I draw to visually understand what I am thinking, I draw to evaluate my ideas and intuitions by seeing them coming to life on paper, I draw to help my mind thinking without limitations, without boundaries.

Drawing with data is an invaluable tool to discover what is unique about the numbers at hand. It also raises new questions about the data itself. This limiting practice helps to reveal new possible analyses to perform: Instead of being overwhelmed by the size of a dataset and by millions of numbers, we focus only on their nature, their organization, and doing so often opens new opportunities originating from this vantage point. To expand their data-drawing vocabulary, designers can access hundreds of years of visual information encoding — the evolution of music notation from medieval times to contemporary music, the experimentation with geometric shapes that characterized Avant-Garde artists of the last century. These visual languages, while clearly pursuing different goals, have a lot in common with data visualization: they draw on common perception principles and use simple shapes, select symbols and a definite range of colors to create basic visual compositions that deliver a message and please the eye.

SNEAK CONTEXT IN (ALWAYS). A dataset might lead to many stories. Data is a tool that filters reality in a highly subjective way, and from quantity, we can get closer to quality. Data, with its unique power to abstract the world, can help us understand it according to relevant factors. How a dataset is collected and the information included — and omitted — directly determines the course of its life. Especially if combined, data can reveal much more than originally intended. As semiologists have theorized for centuries, language is only a part of the communication process — context is equally important. This is why we have to reclaim a personal approach to how data is captured, analyzed and displayed, proving that subjectivity and context play a big role in understanding even big events and social changes — especially when data is about people. Data, if properly contextualized, can be an incredibly powerful tool to write more meaningful and intimate narratives. To research this realm, I undertook a laborious personal project: a yearlong hand-drawn data correspondence with information designer Stefanie Posavec. We have numerous personal and work similarities — I am Italian and live in New York, and she is American and lives in London. We are the exact same age, and we are only-children living far away from our families. Most importantly, we both work with data in a very handcrafted way, trying to add a human touch to the world of computing and algorithms, using drawing instead of coding as our form of expression. And despite having met only twice in person, we embarked upon what we called Dear Data. For a year, beginning Sept. 1, 2014, Posavec and I collected our personal data around a shared topic — from how many times we complained in a week, to how frequently we chuckled; from our obsessions and habits as they showed up, to interactions with our friends and partners. At the end of the week we analyzed our information and hand-drew our data on a postcard-sized sheet of paper, creating analog correspondence we sent to each other across the Atlantic. It was a slow, small and incredibly analog transmission, which through 52 pretexts in the form of data revealed an aspect of ourselves and our lives to the other person every week. We spent a year collecting our data manually instead of relying on a self-tracking digital app, add- ing contextual details to our logs and thus making them truly personal, about us and us alone. For the first seven days of Dear Data we chose a seemingly cold and impersonal topic: how many times we checked the time in a week. On the front of my postcard, (as shown above) every little symbol represents all of the times I checked the time, ordered per day and hour chronologically — nothing complicated. But the different variations of my symbols on the legend indicate anecdotal details that describe these moments: Why was I checking the time? What was I doing? Was I bored, hungry or late? Did I check it on purpose, or just casually glance at the clock while occupied in another activity? Cumulatively, this gave Posavec an idea of my daily life through the excuse of my data collection — something that’s not possible if meaning isn’t included in the tracking. As the weeks moved on, we shared everything about ourselves through our data: our envies, the sounds of our surroundings, our private moments and our eating habits.
We truly became friends through this manual transmission. And in fact, removing technology from the equation triggered us to find different ways to look at data — as excuses to reveal something about ourselves, expanding beyond any singular log, adding depth and personality to quantitative bits of information. In a time when self-tracking apps are proliferating, and when the amount of personal data we collect about ourselves is increasing all the time, we should actively add personal and contextual meaning to our tracking. We shouldn’t expect an app to tell us something about ourselves without any active effort on our part; we have to actively engage in making sense of our own data in order to interpret those numbers according to our personal story, behaviors and routine. While not everyone can do a project as hyper-personal as this one, data visualization designers can make their interpretations more personal by spending time with any type of data. This is the only way we can unlock its profound nature and shed light on its real meaning.

FINALLY, REMEMBER THAT DATA IS IMPERFECT (AS WE ARE). Let’s just stop thinking data is perfect. It’s not. Data is primarily human-made. “Data-driven” doesn’t mean “unmistakably true,” and it never did. It’s time to leave behind any presumption of absolute control and universal truth and embrace an informed depiction of the big numbers and small imperfections that work together to describe reality. And data visualization should embrace imperfection and approximation, allowing us to envision ways to use data to feel more empathic, to connect with ourselves and others at a deeper level. The more effort we put into researching and translating, the easier the reader will understand and relate to the stories we tell. But this requires a paradigm shift in the way we represent information visually. We should learn how to include and render the more qualitative and nuanced aspects of data. We should experiment with how to visualize uncertainty, possible errors and imperfections in our data. And most importantly, we should keep in mind how data can be a powerful tool for all designers, bringing stories to life in a visual way and adding structural meaning to our projects. It is an uncommonly exciting time to be a data visualization designer; projects and opportunities are more and more complex and challenging, and the field is growing and becoming even more popular. We have to find new languages, and explore how to convey knowledge and inspire feelings simultaneously with data. We have to explore how to be faithful to scientific accuracy while allowing space for exceptions to flourish. We have to bring data to life — human life. I believe we’re primed for the future. Let’s get started.

Working with small data and design rules gives anyone enough structure to produce compelling artworks. Data is a material for creative production and doesn’t have to be burdened by technology. There is a clear benefit in what a physical approach to observing and representing data can bring to the process that computers cannot. Sketching with data not only makes data more accessible and understandable, it also introduces novel ways of thinking and leads to designs that are uniquely customized for the specific type of problems we are working with. Drawing with data is a limiting practice that helps to reveal new possible avenues of analysis to perform. Instead of being overwhelmed by the size of a dataset and by millions of numbers, we focus only on their nature, their organization, and new opportunities often arise from this vantage point. Ultimately, even when we work with “Big Data,” the whole point is making it meaningful, contextual. It’s all about making it smarter, smaller, and more understandable. Even small quantities of data (or the lack of it) can tell us a lot about ourselves, the world we live in, and how we live in it. Data celebrates the incomplete, imperfect yet precious human details of life. This is why I believe we have to reclaim a personal approach to how all kinds of data are captured, analyzed, and displayed, in any data-driven story or project where we want our audience to truly engage, to truly relate.

It’s always thrilling to look back on your life and see how often it’s the smallest of interactions that completely change your life’s direction and set you on a new path. For us, it was a conversation over a beer, where, barely knowing each other, we nervously started dreaming of ways to collaborate. This small interaction was the impetus for a project that consumed the next two years of our lives as well as became the foundation for a working relationship that, while not without its struggles, has developed into a collaboration with unexpected longevity. We are two data visualization designers living on either side of the Atlantic (Giorgia in New York, and Stefanie in London) who live lives seemingly in parallel. We met, and — struck by how many personal and work similarities we shared — we wanted to get to know each other better. So we challenged ourselves, we would do this this using the material we were most familiar with: data. For our project Dear Data, each week throughout a year we collected and measured different types of personal data relating to our lives and then visualized it as a drawing on a postcard which we then sent as a type of “slow data” transmission of our personalities and our days to the other person. This was first and foremost a personal project, created in the evenings and on the weekends as our immensely-patient partners watched as we made space on our kitchen tables to draw, crumple up, throw away, tear our hair out in frustration, then draw some more until we finally had a postcard we felt was good enough to be shared with our newfound collaborator. But most importantly, this was a project where we put all of ourselves as human beings and designers into this radical experimentation: approaching the data we collected from as snapshots of our days and lives, and sketching our personalities for the over person to discover with the most contemporary material, data.
As this project unfolded, we began to understand each others’ personal and professional foibles both in the postcards we sent each other and the messages we would furiously text back and forth as the project developed. We shared the most revealing and vulnerable aspects of ourselves: our flaws, our bad habits, and even shameful revelations from our pasts and our thoughts in the form of drawn data to be interpreted by the other person. It’s as though we were keeping a shared diary within a weekly rhythm, where we used this tool — this material — to compose a portrait of the other person through these weekly fragments of her nature. Over a year we connected at a deep level, learning to love each other’s imperfections, but we could do this — though data — only because we’ve been working in a very manual and personal way. In fact, as we gathered our weekly data, the process was more labour-intensive than just deriving standard metrics from technological devices: we conceived Dear Data from the beginning as a “personal documentary” more than a “quantified self project” where we didn’t only quantify numbers but we were also adding contextual details to our logs, thus making them truly personal, about us and us alone. But there is much more to this story, at least for us. The most unexpected and heartwarming reward for us is how our project resonated with an incredibly wide and diverse range of people: with Dear Data we have been able for the first time in our professional lives to truly speak beyond the closed rooms of designers or data visualization practitioners. Since the project was made public, we have seen hundreds of postcards made by people who after hearing our story wanted to try the process for themselves, many seeking out their own data ‘penpals’ and also setting their own yearly challenges to draw their data. We are also touched at how many young children are reading their parents’ Dear Data book and are excitedly-drawing their own data (though we would have written about less adult themes in our postcards had we realised we’d have such a youthful audience!) And more incredibly, teachers from grade school to university and beyond are using the Dear Data format to teach their students the world of data: an amazing (and humbling) result from what started as a side project. This analog, manual and even imperfect way we approached data has opened the idea of data to a wider audience and made it more accessible, more understandable and more easily relatable to their daily lives. We’ve both found with previous projects that it’s often difficult to get people to understand (for example) what big data is, or what open data is, if they don’t know and fully understand what data is in the first place. Starting small is how we hope to increase data literacy and further these conversations.

The most important achievement for a designer or even an artist is to have an impact on people’s lives and also, to explore further how we — as designers who work with data — can use our daily tools and materials to speak beyond our closed circles and truly engage unexpected audiences. We are part of the data visualization community, and as in any community, there is healthy debate on a discipline’s function and best practice. There have been debates that seek to define what is and isn’t data visualization, what is data art and and what is data design, or whether if to “enjoy” a visualization you should clearly know if it was meant to be an artistic exploration or a design project. When we hold Dear Data up to these definitions, it doesn’t quite fit: it might be art, it might be communication design, it might be data visualization, it is probably all three: but its interdisciplinary qualities are an asset, not a failing. We need to embrace the in-between as practitioners to move forward: by following the ‘rules’ and not taking risks, we ourselves risk treading water in one place, never extending the boundaries of our community. Would a data-driven project that firmly adhered to specific disciplinary rules inspire a child to draw their own data and see the world through the eyes of a data collector? Or would defining a project only as an artwork offer an opportunity for a data visualization practitioner to become interested in ways they could make their practices more human-scaled, smaller, and more memorable? By working in purposely-blurred spaces, we we were able ultimately reach a broader audience and help our practice to progress. If we set out to create something that neatly fit within the boundaries of our discipline, our project would been indistinguishable from all the other projects that conformed to these boundaries. However, by placing an emphasis on working in the fuzziness and the in-between spaces, in revealing in being truly interdisciplinary, we made a project that stood out, was noticed, and made an impact outside of our community through its very nature of not quite fitting.

At Accurat we’ve been working regularly in the culture and entertainment industry over the last few years, creating static and interactive data driven visual narratives.
When designing, especially for this specific audience, we believe that one of the key features of our design process should always be a constant visual research to achieve pleasant and compelling aesthetics through which representing our data analyses. We like to think at our data visualization projects as engaging visual ways to convey the richness of the stories we experience in our everyday lives, rather than simplifications of the world. A pure and beautiful visual can become an extremely powerful trigger to get people curious and wanting to explore its contents, and this is why we like the idea of making people think “Oh, that is beautiful. And strange” in the first place, and then “I want to know what this is about!”. Research has demonstrated that aesthetics plays a key role in shaping people responses to any kind of products, and people also draw on aesthetic elements to form their opinion on functionality and credibility. Moreover, aesthetics is deeply associated with emotions and feelings and has a deep influence on how users and readers perceive information:
Beauty cannot replace functionality, but beauty and functionality together achieve incredibly greater results.
But how can we do that? We are confronted everyday with many and different visual languages, which interpenetrate, cross over and interfere one with another and can be easily combined and adopted to represent information through in a visual way. A crucial question is how to shape unexpected, but at the same time evocative visuals on data-driven projects?
How to use conventional materials in entirely unconventional ways in order to create a new experiences and mode of engagements? In my last Medium post I dissected our process for building dense and rich narratives, working with layers and hierarchies of information; in this article I focus on the very aesthetic aspects of data visualizations and on the idea of going beyond conventions, presenting some works of the studio within this angle. It is laid-out as a personal perspective on the topic, including specific relevant comments and observations we collected during past years from readers, and it mainly draws from the article I published on the Malofiej21 book and from my talk at the Visualized Conference 2014.
